What we have discussed so far forms the basis of relational modeling.
Relational modeling is forming relationships between data tables.
First, we need to discuss
normalization in order to better understand relational modeling.
Normalization refers to eliminating redundancy.
Each table should have data around a specific topic.
This eliminates modification complexities and saves on storage.
As mentioned, normalization helps in eliminating database modification complexities.
For example, if Jon Doe changes their phone number,
only customer table needs to be updated.
We don't need to update order table,
and thus we save on storage since we are not
copying all customer data for every single order.
Another fundamental concept is around keys,
primary key and foreign key.
A key is nothing but an index of a record in a table.
Primary keys. Primary keys are unique identifiers,
and there is only one primary key in a table.
Also, primary key column cannot be blank or null.
Primary keys are intended to identify a unique record in a table.
In our tables, customer ID,
project ID, and order ID are our primary keys.
Now let's talk about foreign keys.
A foreign key is a set of
one or more column that refers to a primary key in another table.
A table can have one or more foreign keys.
Foreign keys can contain duplicates and can have null values.
In order table, customer ID and project ID will be our foreign keys.
Product ID is the primary key of the product table,
and customer ID is the primary key of customer table.
Product table and customer table contain no foreign keys.
As you can see, customer 123,
which refers to Jon,
has two orders, hence two records in orders table that have same customer ID.
He purchase A1B2, red square eraser both the times.
In our data model,
if for some reason a customer does not have a customer ID and makes a purchase,
the record can still be created in order table,
but it won't be created in customer table unless it does assign an ID.
To summarize, customer ID, product ID,
and order ID are our primary keys in their respective tables,
and customer ID and project ID are foreign keys in order table.
Keys help us in establishing relationships between tables
that is needed to run complex queries that join data from different tables.
In our example, if we want to create a buying pattern for Jon,
we can join customer table,
order table, and product table to see Jon
prefers red color product and is a frequent buyer.
Can you notice anything about the order dates?
He buys erasers on holidays.
This information is important for marketing so that they
can advertise to Jon the products that fall in red color palette.
This information is also important for inventory management team.
They can predict demand of red color products and have inventory accordingly.
The dataset we have here is miniscule in comparison to what real world data looks like.
Generally, these insights are derived from tables that could have millions of rows.
The concepts discussed here are
fundamental to the understanding of a relational database.
Relational database have data in tables.
Tables are linked through keys,
and data in these tables is normalized.
Entity data captures current state of an application,
such as who our customers are,
or what products we have.
The drawbacks of entity data model are joins might get
complicated and introduce latency for
queries that need to combine data from cross tables.
Advantages are removal of data duplication,
and simple or easy to understand basic data structure.
In the next section,
we'll introduce you to event data. See you soon.